The Hubble Space Telescope, also called the HST, is a telescopic observatory that orbits 600 kilometers above the Earth. It is the first scientific mission of any kind designed for routine service by astronauts. It is one of the largest and most complex satellites ever built and was deployed April 25, 1990 from the space shuttle Discovery.
When Hubble was designed in the 1970s, NASA stated that its main scientific objectives were to determine:
* The constitution, physical characteristics, and dynamics of celestial bodies. 
* The nature of processes that occur in the extreme physical conditions existing in and between astronomical objects.
* The history and evolution of the universe.
* Whether the laws of nature are universal in the space-time continuum.
That's a pretty tall order for a relatively small object!
The Hubble Space Telescope is as large as a tractor-trailer (43.5 feet long and 14 feet in diameter) and weighs 12 tons. It looks like nothing more than a five-story tower of stacked silver canisters. But each canister houses important telescope equipment. The telescope has focusing mirrors, computers, imaging instruments, and pointing and control mechanisms. Extending from the telescope are solar panels for generating electricity and antennae for communicating with operators on the ground.
Scientists can see better with Hubble than with any telescope on the ground because Hubble travels above the atmosphere. On Earth, the atmosphere makes pictures taken by visible-light telescopes look smeary – clouds, precipitation, and atmospheric temperature changes get in the way. But in the near vacuum of space, Hubble can take very clear, crisp pictures -- no clouds or atmosphere exist between it and the star or galaxy it's observing.
Every day Hubble archives between three and five gigabytes of data and sends 10 to 15 gigabytes to astronomers around the world. Once the telescope gathers the data, its computers turn the information into long strings of numbers that are beamed to Earth as radio signals. This information streams through a series of satellite relays to the Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. Then it travels by telephone line to the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore. It is there that the numbers are converted back into pictures and useful data for study.
The Hubble Space Telescope is named for astronomer Edwin P. Hubble. As a young boy, Hubble read tales of traveling to undersea cities and journeying to the center of the Earth. These stories by adventure novelists stoked young Hubble's imagination of faraway places. He fulfilled those childhood dreams by becoming an astronomer, exploring distant galaxies with telescopes, and developing theories that changed the field of astronomy. 
But Hubble didn't settle immediately on astronomy as a career. He first studied law as a Rhodes Scholar at Queens College in Oxford, England. A year after passing the bar exam, Hubble realized that his love of exploring the stars was greater than his attraction to law. He therefore abandoned law and studied astronomy at the University of Chicago, where he completed his doctoral thesis in 1917. 
Using the largest telescope of its day, Hubble looked far into space to study the Andromeda nebula (which we now call the Andromeda Galaxy or M31). With this powerful telescope, he saw stars near the edge of Andromeda, and he reasoned that Andromeda was a galaxy in its own right. He proved that galaxies, composed of stars and planets, exist beyond our own Milky Way. He also proved that they are distributed almost uniformly in every direction.
As Hubble continued his study, he discovered that the universe is expanding. The more distant a galaxy is from Earth, the more its light is shifted toward the red end of the spectrum -- redshifted. In 1929 he determined that the more distant the galaxy from Earth, the greater its redshift, and the faster it appears to move away. Known as Hubble's Law, this discovery is the foundation of the Big Bang theory. The theory states that the universe began after a cataclysmic event in which it underwent a rapid period of inflation. The movement of the galaxies away from us is the continuation of that motion. Hubble's discovery is considered one of the greatest triumphs of 20th century astronomy. However, confirmation was difficult, until the launch of the HST.
With the telescope in orbit, astronomers are getting a picture of the universe clearer than anything they could previously obtain. The telescope's stunning photos are showing the world about the wonders of space. Many of the world's foremost astronomers are using Hubble to probe the horizons of space and time. Designed to last at least 15 years, Hubble is providing intriguing new data about black holes, the birth of galaxies, planetary systems around other stars, and, of course, the expansion of the universe.

